you are listening to part two of two of
our conversation with Chris bish
now Chris you've mentioned this crisis
or pivotal point for Humanity and what
insights or experiences have you gained
from that from your psychedelic work
about this crisis or pivotal point and
what do you see as the evolutionary
trajectory of humanity as a whole coming
through that well that is a big question
isn't it that's a huge question and it
has absorbed a lot of my time and in
non-ordinary states of consciousness
it's been one of the recurring themes
and because what happens when you when
your individual bubble of consciousness
dissolves when the drop opens you you
fall into the divine at different depths
and one of the things that happens I
think is that one falls into deep time
so one falls out of linear time into the
deeper expanse of time so the the
universe seems to have many different
time signatures and one can experience
arcs of time over a thousands and
thousands of years as if it were a
simple hour and even hundreds of
thousands of years and and so as I
dissolved at the individual level I was
drawn into repeatedly into the
evolutionary arc that underlies my
individual existence I was drawn into
the arc of human evolution as a whole
which is just of course one layer of the
larger evolution of the planet and solar
system so on
and mm-hmm justice I was drawn into
these large episodes of collective
suffering when I would spin out when
eventually these would peak and I would
go through some large combustion death
rebirth process when I would spin out
into spiritual spaces ecstatic
experiences or the deeper warp and woof
of the universe I was often drawn in
tore her head various visions are drawn
into the experience of what's really
taking place behind the scenes and that
is the this evolutionary crescendo
that's building in time this breaking
forth of this deeper consciousness in
history that's breaking forward at a
time and eventually in in the 55th
session out of a 73 session series I had
an extraordinary experience in which I
actually what seems to have happened as
best as I can understand it is that at
some collective level I went through the
death rebirth of our species it it was I
was in a state of consciousness hard to
describe but I was at that time I was
literally billions of people
simultaneously and every individual and
all billions at the same time
simultaneously were beginning to go
through a life death crisis that was
literally global it was just a profound
a restructuring of life life was being
broken down to the very core it was I
think in there's a massive die-off
that's that's coming down to us which is
simply the fallout of our
our ecological foolishness so this was a
just an existential death it was
physical possibility as well yeah this
was an entire species brought to
extinction brought to the very edge of
extinction this is yeah this this was
being taken into the very essence the
depth of this historical crisis which
seemed to be peaking somewhere in the
21st century and this is an imminent
kind of crisis and it looked like in the
center of this crisis it looked like we
would all die it looks like this was
this was it this was the end of it we
were we were going to go extinct and
then when it was like being on an island
with a hurricane coming over in the end
everybody was forced to just hunkering
down and holding on and hoping that they
weren't being blown away because and it
looked like death was inevitable and
then at the in the last minutes suddenly
the storm crested and passed and there
were survivors and survivors began to
find each other and began to reconstruct
but then what happened was the most
extraordinary explosion of of new social
structures new forms that had reflected
the birth of a new consciousness that
was literally birthed by the pain of our
near extinction event and out of this
trauma of a species brought to the very
edge of extinction there was a a tearing
way of what is in essential and and a
birth of what is essential and I've this
I think of the birth of soul
consciousness but not just a birth of
soul consciousness or put it this way
the nature of soul bukhan
justice is to know the truth of our
interconnectivity it is to know the
common ground that we all share it is to
know our place in the universe and our
camaraderie with all of the beings not
just human beings but all other beings
who share this planet that sprang into
an Augmented capacity sprang into an
empowered position so that when we began
to reconstruct our lives we weren't
really reconstructing we were creating a
new culture we are creating new social
forms that were reflecting new realities
that had been birthed in the throes of
this crisis that this was a shattering
and a profound experience for me because
it took me it took me several years
really to absorb the experience because
it's like it's like being in her Oshima
yes on the week before the bomb goes off
and knowing that every human being that
you see on the face of the planet is
about to go through a nightmare of great
suffering and then to have and to have
so much so profound much profound
respect for these beautiful beings who
volunteered to undergo this crisis as
part of our collective transformation
and then in years following as the work
continued and I continue to go into this
there were several episodes where I
entered into deep time and spent time
with what I call the future human just
had the opportunity to be with this new
archetype that's coming forward in
history and it's only
the experience of the future being that
humanity is becoming that we really
begin to understand the larger
evolutionary trajectory and what we are
actually giving birth to it's it is as
if we're going in the labor yes we we
didn't know we were pregnant it's only
in seeing the baby that we really
understand the whole gestational process
so Nature has been gestating this human
being for a hundred thousand years I
mean ever since sapiens emerged on the
scene we've been behind the scenes just
dating the next layer of our
evolutionary story I'm basically
describing the prenatal Perry matrix
outlined by Stan Grof - and but it's
just on a collective level it's on a
collective level and this the future
human is is such an extraordinarily
beautiful being I mean it's just when I
focus my mind on it even now it brings
me to tears because it's it's a humanity
healed of its divisive history it's a
humanity of all of its wounds resolved
it's a humanity with its with its heart
completely open at a deep and profound
level in collective embrace it's a
humanity with its mind open into deep
communion with the transcendent it's
it's a humanity where war ends and and
cooperation and collaboration is the
norm it's a planet that has outgrown its
its divisive nough sand has entered into
a time of history of collaboration not
monolithic Satan sameness but tremendous
creative collaboration where we begin to
consciously cooperate with the divine
rather than unconscious
cooperate with divine and this is what
you've termed the diamond soul the
diamond soul yes because I yeah this
birth of this new human on the face of
the planet I've also heard it termed
homo luminous which sounds about the
same and you think that this is not just
our human evolution that this
reverberates all through the beingness
of the source that this is not just
about us it's not just about us and
whatever is happening on this planet I'm
sure is mirrored in similar processes
that are taking place in other planets
and other solar systems and other
galaxies so that this gestational
process is a natural process it's simply
an extension of evolution reaching a new
critical point yes and that and
everything we're learning about the
evolution of our galaxies and and the
universe at large is that whatever is
taking place here in one way or another
is taking place in other corners of the
universe so we're just and our fields
out further and further and further we
start to get a feel for what you're
saying yeah we are cosmic citizens we're
not only global citizens but we are
cosmic citizens and I'm sure they'll
come a time when higher orders of
community intergalactic communion will
emerge as part of the natural sequence
weathers of course many people believe
that's already begun and and maybe it
has but it's almost an it's inevitable
that it will be part of our future so
beautiful Chris so beautiful thank you
for that and it'll speed up the more of
us cooperate with that
yes it's speeding it speeds up the more
we collaborate the faster it moves for
us individually and us collectively
that's the other thing that emerged from
that critical session I had described
and that is an understanding of how we
actually we have a huge distance to
travel as a species and a very short
period of time to travel that distance
and there have been many people who have
pondered how can we possibly change as
much as we have to change in order to
survive in as little time as the
ecological crisis seems to be giving us
to change and I think the key is
understanding the collective dynamics
that are at play that it's it's not
simply 7 million 7 billion individual
Minds that have to change at core it's
this collective mind of the species
which is undergoing a change so if you
take what we know about fields and
fields theory and nonlinear systems and
tipping points and catalytic points and
you make the assumption that the
collective psyche is in some way a
unified field and that what we know
about nonlinear systems applies also to
the collective psyche then we can
understand how we might actually make it
the as far as we need to travel as
quickly as we need to make the traveling
and that is all the suffering and all of
the confrontation with our divisive ways
are not simply registering on our
individual psyches but everything that
the individual registers is fed into and
registers at the collective level and
that when enough individuals come to a
tipping point and and begin to choose a
different way of living themselves
individually sooner or later the species
comes into a tipping point and at that
point hundredth monkey phenomena
kind of
the the pace of evolution accelerates
exponentially the new common sense
emerges it's like playing chess with
cliana Scott C yes yes and that's why
programs such as yours is so important
because just because of the depth and
breadth of the outreach the number of
synapses of our collective brain that
you're able to bring together the new
technology is just opening up
exponential increase of understanding in
your advanced obsession so I'm going to
change that question here you
experienced various permutations of the
divine and domains that lie beyond the
story of humanity's evolution and beyond
all form but they too are intimately
related would you share your experiences
and insights with us regarding that I
mean you you have been all along but
with a specific focus yeah you know this
is hard to do without sounding like a
madman yeah well that's that's the
challenge of even trying to speak about
psychedelic experiences because it's so
it expands exponentially the frame of a
conversation that unless you're willing
to enter into that conversation it's
just you know since I live at a
university I know how easy it is for
very intelligent well-educated people to
write off this entire conversation sure
but so if we let go of all of that and
go into the possibility that one can
open up to the mind of the universe then
the most extraordinary story begins to
unfold the invitation here so many ways
one could put it I don't know the
invitation the privilege is to
experience the ways in which the
universe is alive in depths
that are hidden too simple of physical
consciousness to enter into archetypal
reality and I don't mean that in a
narrow Jungian sense but to enter into
the flows of intelligence the flows of
consciousness the flows of life that
actually are giving structure at you and
giving form to time-space itself to go
outside of time and space to go enter
back into time and space to just to be
drawn into in some way the intimate in
an intimate way the very birthing of
time and space is an ongoing event to
experience the enormity of the
intelligence of the universe I mean it's
I mean we know what it's like when we're
around very intelligent people they're
just different than people who aren't
intelligent and but to enter into orders
of magnitude of intelligence that's
actually behind the universe is a it's a
mind shattering experience and to be
able to dissolve and to be for a time
that kind of being to touch the edges of
the garment of the divine is it just it
radically reframes you know once
understanding of the life that one is
part of and then equal to the
intelligence is the compassion the love
it's just it shatters again and again
all frames of reference the the love
that's behind the universe is as large
as the intelligence that's manifesting
in the universe and you know this is
this planet is hard life is hard it
there's so many there's so much
suffering and it's such a difficult
place to be that the very intensity of
time space expiry
has been used to argue against the the
intelligence of that there is an
intelligence and that there is a love a
compassion behind existence but to
actually experientially enter into
communion with that intelligence and to
feel that love and to begin to
understand some of the ways in which
once you open up to the true depth of
the project of an emergent universe and
the depth of the project of the divine
then you begin to understand the ways in
which it it there really is compassion
manifesting this suffering that we have
been going through for so many hundreds
of thousand years is just a phase it's
not an enduring condition it's a phase
that reflects the limitations of our
species that are particular times in
evolution there is a an ongoing fullness
that is expressing itself we will move
beyond all this pain generation we will
move beyond all the the hate and bigotry
of our divisive ego consciousness and
then and then and then and just there to
be moot to go into experiences that
stand calls the super cosmic and meta
cosmic void to go into the domain of the
formless the domain that is the great
plenum yeah is this beyond even the
creation and the evolution yeah it's
where creation and evolution comes from
it's it's in it's transcending all time
in all space going into some kind of
fundamental reality where form does not
exist
none of the forms exists and it is that
reality which actually gets birth to all
form
so it's it's it's often described as the
void but it's also the plenums the
divine plenum that it is the it's
sometime in Buddhism sometimes calls it
the Buddha womb the awakened one like
the cosmic womb it's the mother universe
it's it's that which is just dating
everything which is because this
physical universe is vast as it is as
the normos as it is magnificent as it is
time and space as we know it is not the
only universe there are other universes
so we have to get to a radically
expanded cosmology and all of these
universes are manifesting out of a
primal reality which is formless in
itself the shear the majesty of the
mother she's so beautiful yes yes yes
yeah I think Shri tribe is his super
consciousness yeah I 3-hour bender I
think is one of the the great thinkers
helping us make the pivot away from the
old cosmology the up and out cosmology
into an incarnation of cosmology great a
great thinker yep well I you had you had
talked about you would recommend a less
than high dose regimen what would you
recommend from your development state at
this point to an early Earth so yeah
we're talking to my younger self or if
I'm talking to my own children who are
young adults now well I would recommend
it partly it depends upon what are you
trying to accomplish i when I got into
this work what I was seeking was
enlightenment you know like what most of
us were seeking to be a better human
being to be
more awakened conscious individual being
and what I found was if if you want to
seek classically what we mean by
enlightenment to be able to become
completely open to the depth of reality
in the immediate moment in a way which
ego yields and what I call lief
consciousness yields to tree
consciousness to the transparent life of
the totality I think it's actually
better to work with low doses to work
take to go track down the ego where it
lives and the ego lives and clothes it
lives on the earth and it it needs to be
tracked back to its lair and really
working that means really working with
lower doses and really taking it apart
bit by bit integrating that type of work
with with meditation various classical
meditation practices and I should
mention all my life I've also been a you
know I'm a teacher of religious studies
so I've taught courses in world
religions and Eastern religions and
comparative mysticism all my life so
I've spent my entire life learning from
the sages and have just deep abiding
respect for the spiritual levels of
spiritual realization achieved by the
great masters of men and women of all
lineages and I've always tried to
combined contemplative practice with
shamanic practice I've I became avid
Rhianna practitioner 15 years ago and I
I've tried to integrate my Vajrayana
practices with my shamanic psychedelic
work and tried to put those together but
I found it overtime that a lot was
taking place in these sessions that were
not serving the purpose of individual
enlightenment at all and I think that
has to do really when you start working
with high doses you get involved in a
different game here the game is
collective enlightenment and and the
game is actually the the game of
exploring the universe and I don't think
you need to transcend time
or to take evolution back to the Big
Bang are be absorbed in archetypal
levels of reality in order to achieve
enlightenment that's it's just a it's a
different enterprise as a philosopher I
was drawn into the enterprise of knowing
the universe but if even if we focus on
that enterprise I would do it
differently and that is of course I
would I would continue to always in bed
working with psychedelics into a daily
spiritual practice and my the rule of
thumb is the deeper non-ordinary states
you go into on a temporary basis the
more important it is to have a strong
daily practice to anchor your temporary
practice right so it's not an
alternative it has to be grounded in the
regimen of spiritual life which is moral
living social commitments social
relationships and what you do every day
when you get up right but in working
with non or with psychedelics I would
alternate I think I would work at more
strong doses but I think working for
example if you're working with LSD 300
micrograms is a lot easier than working
at 500 or 600 micrograms just to get
specific yeah and I and I would
alternate working with synthetic
psychedelics like LSD with organic
psychedelics you know we all know
Terence Mckenna was a great advocate of
psilocybin and ayahuasca
DMT derivatives and I would alternate I
would I think psilocybin mushrooms for
example it really helped the body absorb
it's very it to me it's a very physical
kind of experience yeah and if you're
working with high dose LSD inter spacing
those sessions with psilocybin sessions
or ayahuasca sessions can really kind of
help the body and the subtle energy
systems absorb
the the deep visionary states you go
into when you're working with LSD
because I think of LSD is kind of a
high-altitude drug you know it tends to
in high doses it tends to blow you into
cosmic territory a black diamond room
yes yes and and and there are other the
organic substances ik and the two that
come to mind particularly are psilocybin
and ayahuasca really kind of help the
body and ground these very deep states
of consciousness more completely into
the physical body into the mental body
into the emotional body so I guess I
would do fewer high dose LSD sessions
and I would work with the with an
alternate regimen of organic
psychedelics well that does tend to take
the common place away from it if you
were to alternate mm-hmm I can see how a
time after time after time of doing a
high dose without the intention that he
brought to it of expanding rather than
just playing could get tiresome if all
you were doing was playing yeah yeah and
to me it's been interesting how many
people have felt that if you if you work
with let's say LSD that eventually you
keep going back to the same level and
you just keep experiencing the same
lessons and therefore you know you
thought of it as Houston Smith said when
you get the message you hang up the
phone right but I that hasn't been my
experience my experience is if you're
working in a very internal way
internalized way as long as you were
willing to throw another log on the fire
the universe will keep taking you
through break point after break point
after break point and the reason I
stopped I mean
in 1999 I stopped what I call my serious
work the very high dose work and I
stopped for a couple of reasons
but one of the reasons was it was
producing too much wear and tear on my
physical body and particularly my subtle
energy body
I was literally running quantities of
energy that were just larger quantities
of energy than even I could handle even
using these archetypal Vajrayana deity
practices in between sessions I just had
to step away I had to slow down and let
my energy recalibrate and adjust to what
had been what had been realized in all
these years of work and the other reason
I stopped was it I couldn't it was
getting increasingly difficult to come
back not not psychological but it was
too painful
yeah to come back into time and space
when one has gone into the the fields of
diamond luminosity they are just they're
so magnificent they're so beautiful and
to be that intimate with the divine and
then have to cut them back into you know
the beautiful earth but the more limited
circumstances of ordinary consciousness
even with consciousness is being
transformed that is the real drawback of
what I call the path of temporary
immersion it's a it the the methods that
move you more slowly into these deep and
profound spaces allow you to keep those
terror to keep those spaces after your
retreat is over but the path of
temporary immersion plunges you ahead of
yourself in a way right so it's a
temporary yeah it's just a visit it's a
visit it yeah you know Ram Dass said it
opens windows but it doesn't allow you
to go out the door and it's I understand
that and it's true but it's a visit that
changes the course of your own evolution
when spirit told me
time when I was backing away and said 20
years in 20 years out so 20 years of
work in don't you you can't assimilate
that with that expecting to spend 20
active years of assimilation and now I I
actually think it's even more than that
I think that when you work in very deep
states of consciousness like this it
doesn't just affect you for the rest of
your life it affects you at a soul level
so that I think it really would take
many lifetimes to assimilate the full
scale and scope of of what has unfolded
in the work so it changes your deep
evolutionary trajectory so the challenge
at this point I think is now that we
have these technologies that allow us to
blow out the levels and to plunge deeply
into these places of the universe the
challenge really shifts not from
breaking out the challenge shifts to
integration yes yeah deep deep
integration in your mind and your heart
and your social relationships in your
body on a day-to-day basis I guess
that's why the dowels say before
enlightenment chop wood carry water yes
sir in life chop wood carry water yes
yeah yes I Chris would you say that
ultimately the unconditional love that
you experience on your attorneys is the
lesson that we all need to learn hmm
well to me love the unconditional of
unrestricted compassion is it is the
correlate to oneness if the universe
exists as a single entity if if God is
ultimately the fabric of existence and
if oneness is the great truth within
which we live then one is manifest in
all sorts of ways but one of the ways
that manifests
is in this profound emotional ecstatic
embrace of everything which is of all
life you know the shaman comes out of
transcendence cries all my relations I
am one with all my relations with all
the beings of the world so love really
is of the essence because oneness is of
the essence and love is the
manifestation of oneness in the human
heart so that that deep feeling of
acceptance of all beings and every human
being even human beings that are doing
stupid terrible hurtful injurious things
to themselves and to each other but to
not close your heart down to them and to
hold them in that embrace of oneness
yeah I think you're right I think one
love is you know the breathing of the
universe s1 thank you do you sense this
experience and experiences others have
that are similar they co-create a
meeting with the divine so we can all
remember what we have forgotten you know
I do I really do I think you know the
classic story of reincarnation is when
we die we remember and when we're born
we forget you know so when we die
you know the near-death episode research
shows us very clearly when people die or
nearly die they experience a tremendous
accelerated expansion of consciousness
and a sense of remembering how could
they have forgotten the spiritual world
but then when we're born at least at
this stage of our evolution we have a
tendency to forget we contract into
these time-space suits the egoic
identity so these all these technologies
whether it's trance dancing our silence
our fasting or meditation or deep tissue
Rolfing or all these various methods for
loosening up the shell of our body-mind
identity ultimately opens us into this
more intimate dialogue with the universe
in which over and over again we
experience it as a remembering so I
think collectively we are remembering
who we are we're remembering what the
purpose of life is we're remembering you
know what the project is and every time
one of us remembers it makes it easier
for other people to remember so that I
think collectively we are really trying
to incarnate
a field of remembrance which ultimately
converts into in a sense of field of
communion because when we remember that
there is this reality there there is a
universe surrounding the physical
universe there is a mother universe
there is a spiritual reality it's always
there it's it's always tapping at the
back of our consciousness it's always
sustaining our bodies and our hearts and
our minds then remembrance yields to
communion really deeper communion so
that I mean as long as we believed that
the universe was a dead universe who
would want to commune with a dead
universe but if it's a living universe
if it's saturated with intelligence and
saturated with intentionality then
that's a universe I'd want to enter into
communion with so remembering becomes an
ongoing process of entering into
sustained communion where that which we
are here and that which is the totality
together we create something that's
never been before really that's where
we're in the process of creating
thoughts feelings visions social
realities that have never existed on
this planet before yeah thank you
thank you Chris this is zobelle again so
in all the work that you did and the
personal transformation you did and then
you were going back to the University
and being in a very academic world how
did your personal transformation and
practice impact how you were in in the
you know quote-unquote real world and
and the other people mm-hmm you weren't
a model anymore you know yeah but you
only get promoted for your muggle nough
so you know at the universities is a
different order yes that's a complicated
process and it wasn't entirely
comfortable and I I learned how to live
in two worlds I mean this work because
of its legally problematic nature cannot
be discussed openly in academic circles
it can be discussed in certain
avant-garde circles it can be discussed
in Bay Area circles and in very
progressive institutions and I've taught
courses on this type of work at the
California Institute of integral studies
in the Department of Philosophy
cosmology and consciousness but here in
Ohio it's it's a much more conservative
environment and and they have the right
to be where they are and so there were
tensions between but there were tensions
that ultimately I found I could work
with creatively and as my consciousness
changed naturally who I was or what I
was changed and that meant the
experience of my teaching the what I
taught changed and so they're kind of
two levels one is content and then
something there's a deeper level that
has to do with the energetic being
underneath the content so content wise I
was able to design courses where I was
able to disc
some of these phenomena in a certain way
so I've taught a course called
transpersonal studies so we studied
reincarnation research and we studied
near-death episode research and we
studied out-of-body research and I
taught a course called
psychology of religion but it was really
transpersonal psychology of religion and
there I traced the the history of depth
psychology and spent about a third of
the course talking about staying grass
work and psychedelic research never
referencing myself simply referencing
the literature and stained grass work so
and I've taught seminars through the
years in advance transpersonal theory
where I created academic contexts for
students and I to have conversations
about some of these realities and my
colleagues have always you know I've
always had good relationships with my
colleagues and they've known that I've
been out on the far side left but
they've given me room to work there and
I found that if you have student numbers
if you have if you have students who
want to take your courses and if you're
a good citizen of the University you
know if you do your work and you support
the department and you you work on all
the committees and you do all the things
that's expected of you then you really
have much more room to improvise and
push the boundaries than might at first
appear so many people have asked me how
did you get away with teaching the
courses you teach you know at this open
enrollment State University and I found
that you know we really have much more
freedom and flexibility if you're
willing to seize it
then we might initially think and there
are other people who are pushing those
boundaries Tom Roberts that in Illinois
at a State University has been teaching
about psychedelics in its classes for
years and there's in an academic context
where you pay your academic dues to
that discussion but there's there was a
deeper process going on and that is the
deeper my experience became of this
universe it changed how my mind works it
changed how my psyche works and it
changed my energy in a way so that when
I was coming into the classroom and
simply teaching things that were not
about any of these things I was teaching
intro world religions or introduction to
Eastern religions or something like this
it began I found that at a subtle
psychological level at a collective
level things began to happen between
myself and my students that were
somewhat unusual for example I found
that when I would just be reaching for
an example just to make a point to make
a theoretical point I would reach for an
example and I'd create an example out of
my imagination and then after class one
day a student came up to me and when he
was sure that there was no one around
who could hear what he was about to say
the room was empty he said you know it's
strange that you use that example in
class today because that's exactly what
happened to me last week and I found
that that happened
began to happen repeatedly through the
years and students were finding bits and
pieces of their life showing up in my
lectures very in very precise and exact
ways without my intending it without my
even being consciously aware when it was
happening and not only were they finding
pieces of their lives showing up in my
lectures but often it was the parts that
were showing up were touching them in
very very deep and personal ways it was
as if their soul was whispering to my
soul which is passing it up into my
conscious awareness pieces of
information that they needed to heal
themselves that they needed to
to take the next step in their own
evolutionary journey so during these
years when I was doing this work I
became kind of a lightning rod of the
soul for many of my students and this
became so pronounced that I had to
actively consciously engage this process
and understand it more deeply and to
work with it so that I would so that it
wouldn't become too intense for my
students so that it would it would stay
within the bounds of what's appropriate
in a classroom and that's the story that
I tell in the living classroom I tell
the story of that dance that unfolded
between my students and me and then I
began to understand that it was more
than just residence between my students
and me there was a residence that was
being created by the field of our coming
together that there was the field of a
group focused in intense study actually
has an animating effect on the
individual minds that are present there
in a way which activates his collective
these are morphic fields for groups and
my students you know if the faculty had
reservations about what I was doing or
what was happening my students never did
the students were always there they were
much more forward-thinking I think than
the faculty they always met me well and
we just had just wonderful adventures in
the classroom and at the same time I
could not bring everything that I knew
to be true into my undergraduate
classroom it just wasn't fair it wasn't
appropriate and so I had to hold back a
lot and in the later years of my career
and I've retired now that holding back
became difficult for me because I I
could feel a tension that literally a
catch that would happen in my throat
when my instinct was always to share
more information than my circumstance
allowed me to share and I would
sometimes lose control of my voice for
short seconds at a time was kinda like a
bark it was a tension between the forces
that were holding me in check and the
forces that wanted to express itself and
this is basically you know I went
through I was a professor for 33 years
and I've stopped that and I love being
in the classroom I love being with the
students but I've stopped that in order
to write books that I could not I did
not feel that I could write while I was
working as an academic books that are
more openly embracing the hidden side of
my life the psychedelic side of my life
which I hope will put me in
conversations with a different group of
adults more spiritually informed more
progressed in their own spiritual
evolution for two years I worked as the
director of education for the nonprofit
the Institute of noetic Sciences where I
had many opportunities to speak with and
engage and do workshops with people like
yourself people who have been
consciously living the spiritual life
and engaging these issues are not afraid
of these issues or plunging into them
they're these transformative processes
and I hope to be doing more of that work
in the last phase of my life so I've
kind of entered from an astrological
perspective the third turning of the
wheel of Saturn my the second Saturn
cycle from when I was 29 to 58 60 was my
academic career and now I've entered the
third cycle which i think is really more
exclusively focused on this these deep
transformative practices and the
insights that emerge from them yeah it
sounds like your experience with your
students was really beautiful and mm-hmm
I think it was I think
were we were all we all were touched and
we all learned many things from them in
fact the last third of the living
classroom is all essays written by my
students what would happen I have my
students do a lot of writing and most of
their writing is intellectual academic
kind of writing and but every once in a
while a student would take the chance
and write a more personal essay so they
would share the deepest most profound
experience they had ever had they would
share stories of their father's death or
their own conversion experience or their
own experience of nearly dying and I
began to collect these through the years
I would ask him if I would could could
keep a copy of this to use and sometime
in the future and I collected a
beautiful folder these magnificent
stories of transformation and when I
wrote the living classroom I knew that
this was the time to give these back so
the whole last third of the book it's
really a second book is really students
it's sharing these students stories with
the public because they they're just so
beautiful so I think I think it was a
very positive experience for all of us I
know I learned a lot from it yeah it
sounds like it's the stretching dance of
straddling two worlds in that way and
then you know I think we've all
experienced where you might know
something but the person you're talking
to is not ready for that yet mm-hmm and
now we're getting to have this free rein
to talk about things and just let people
be drawn to it or not yeah it's really
lovely yeah and again I I think the the
undergrad to the students were much more
receptive than the faculty I believe
that ya know they're just they're just
they are different generation they are
already you know they have this in their
bones they're a different generation of
souls but Chris don't you think that
those that are doing this work enable
the newer the younger generations
come in already knowing a lot of this
stuff because the works being done I
hope so
I mean I we all have different roles in
this in this evolutionary saga and you
know if there is a seventh generation as
the Hopi prophecies predicted and are
the indigo generation I am and maybe
some of you are part of the sixth
generation you know and our job is to
hold to break ground for these young
people and to hold to create the
container that allows them to come to a
speedier fruition of their own
capacities of their own consciousness on
the planet and I hope that what we're
doing creates an in a very tangible
social structure but also a subtler
psychic structure way creates feels that
empower them absolutely yeah because it
is a collective consciousness and what
what we learn or discover affects them
especially because they're more open to
it they don't have the letting go to do
like a old dinosaurs yes yes and it's
it's a complex feedback cycle I giving
you an example I I often had the
experience where I would read a book and
it would contain a high experience for
me and it would give me insight into
something that I hadn't understood
before I would have a particular
experience in a psychedelic session
where something new what open I would
understand something that I hadn't
understood before and within a week a
student would ask me a question and I
would have an answer which two weeks
previous I wouldn't have had an answer
for that was helpful to them and I
thought oh isn't that interesting isn't
it wonderful how the universe uses one
person's learning to facilitate the
learning of other people and and then
over time I began to realize wait a
minute I'm only seeing one half of a
circle I have the the cart before the
horse
I began to understand that the students
need to know the question that was
coming toward me the student who was
coming to me was actually influencing my
own field and causing me to read some of
the books that I was reading and even
have some of the experiences that I
would hit was having in order to have
something available to them when they
came and actually asked the question so
it so it's not simply that I'm doing
this work and the universe is taking
advantage of distributing this
information but the cycle it's a circle
between students and teachers and I mean
that in a broader sense that their need
to know was actually seeding my need my
capacity to understand so that it's a
circle and I wouldn't be reading or
thinking what I'm thinking if it weren't
for the seeding of these students coming
to me so at that point you truly open up
to the mystery and Majesty of the
universe and just bow in prayer to the
grandeur of what's coming forward we are
all in it together thank you thank you
so what are your thoughts on the legal
use of psychedelics and therapy and
healing and what's going on right now
with using psychedelics as tools Phyllis
on Cosmo actually you know making
inquiry what do you think sure of that
well I think we're tilting back in the
right direction
I'm sure many of your listeners are
aware of maps in the multidisciplinary
Association for psychedelic studies
which is a an educational and lobbying
organization which is trying to change
our laws around psychedelics and is it
successfully moving psychedelics back
into the area of respectable research
supporting research with psychedelics
bringing it back into the therapeutic
arena I think we are the this class of
chemicals is so important that I don't
think we're going to lose them forever
you know we're going to step away from
these very repressive policies of the
late 60s and 70s so that we are going to
re-appropriate with this new wave of
scholars and researchers these
substances for their therapeutic
potential sooner or later as we do that
we will and I think this is also
happening with as we open to ayahuasca
the ayahuasca circles the indigenous
shamanic populations which have been
using psychedelics not only to heal
psychologically but to to engage the
universe spiritually and philosophically
I think as we re appropriate these
substances for their clinical
therapeutic value we are also in the
process of reappropriation um for their
philosophical illuminating value I just
don't see how we can keep pushing these
things away from us the world which
reveals itself through psychedelics is
profoundly compatible with the world
that we are studying that we are
learning through science and it's
particularly compatible with quantum
theory and field theory and and all the
sciences which have been given birth in
the post Newtonian era in the Newtonian
world which is still the academic gospel
of the universities the the universe is
a clockwork and it's a it's a
purposeless machine which moves by
chance and necessity and mathematical
precision but in the quantum world where
we pivoted in the 1930s we're in a very
very different universe where
intentionality saturates the world where
there is a simultaneity fields of
knowledge underlying discrete existence
this is very much
very compatible with the world that
psychedelics are showing us so that
asked the intellectual community really
internalize and absorbs what is truly
the cutting edge of science it's less
it's more open to the type of
experiences that are that emerge
spontaneously in working with
psychedelics so I think that there is a
shift taking place at a very deep
cognitive level among leading thinkers
which is going to open more and more
doorways to psychedelics in the future
and I think we can look forward to a
time in the future when you will be able
to work with psychedelics if you choose
to have a therapeutic if you choose to
incorporate psychedelics into your
therapeutic regimen you'll be able to do
so if you choose to incorporate
psychedelics into your spiritual regimen
you'll be able to do so there have been
a couple of communities in the United
States ayahuasca communities who have
taken their case all the way to the
Supreme Court and have won the right to
use ayahuasca as part of their spiritual
practice so we already are opening up
the legal doors so I see it moving in a
very positive in a very exciting
direction to me psychedelics are one of
the just as a philosopher I cannot over
emphasize how important they are to
opening to facilitating this
intellectual paradigm that's that's
taking place because classically
historically it took decades decades of
spiritual practice before one could have
access to these transpersonal dimensions
of existence but psychedelics can give
even a modest individual short term
exposure to the deeper these deeper
textures of reality and they allow you
to change your thinking even if you
can't abide in those reality
if they allow you to change your
understanding of the world we live in so
that they're tremendous door openers and
I think that we won't be able to turn
down the invitations that they are
extending into us and that they will be
very much part of this vast cultural
awakening taking place yes it seems like
the the paradigm we live in you know the
Newtonian physics the mechanical
clockwork nosov it and people have lost
the ability to find new questions mm-hmm
you know and it sounds like psychedelics
it gives the chance the fish the chance
to observe the water and then you have
whole new possibilities of questions yes
yes and absolutely new questions new
opportunities and it may take you once
the doors are open it may take you not
necessarily to continued psychedelic
experience but it may take you to more
traditional spiritual practices of
meditation yoga whatever but it's a
tremendous door opener yeah yeah you
know I think if you live in the
Newtonian universe I have witnessed for
decades what a terrible terrible
damaging gospel secular humanism is for
our students I mean the vision is that
existence is an accident it's a fluke it
proceeds by chance there's no deeper
intentionality behind your life if you
live in a beautiful healthy body you're
lucky if you live in a and a body
plagued by illness you're just not so
lucky
the universe is unconscious it isn't
paying attention to you I mean how could
how could that be you know that vision
of reality not greed all sorts of
various types of personal and social
pathology and if the universe is
essentially dead and if we are
essentially just material beings
then materialism makes sense we just try
to have as many experiences and as
consume as many material things as we
can before we die because when we die
we're gonna cease to exist anyway so who
cares and that is the gospel which we've
been giving our brightest most creative
minds for generations and now that's
beginning to shift now with the
emergence of an understanding of the way
in which the universe is actually alive
we can document its living nough sin our
laboratories and we can have facilitated
experiential immersion in that aliveness
then that opens up a profoundly expanded
vision of ourselves and it gives us a
kind of leverage to take us away from
this blind consumerism so that we can
begin to draw our resources from a
deeper immersion in the universal in the
universe itself so for people who have a
crisis of lack of meaning in in the
world mm-hmm this could be a really
beneficial Avenue I think it can be very
beneficial I think just reading of
course is enormous ly beneficial I mean
I do a workshop sometimes called no fear
of death and here at my contention is if
you read the right dozen books it should
completely dissolve any fear of death it
should open up the possibilities of
really understanding the in a new way
what the meaning of life is what the
possibilities are the potentials are if
you look at reincarnation research
near-death episode research if you look
at life between life their appeal newton
and where we're regressing people back
not only to their former life memories
but to their awareness of their life
between their incarnations if you
combine that with research and
psychedelics I mean this this
just creates an intellectual context
that opens up all new sorts of avenues
for understanding the meaning of life
than the purpose of life that's fabulous
thank you mm-hmm Chris before we bring
this symposium to a close I'd like to
read something you wrote in dark night
early dawn okay and you said I believe
that this divine marriage of
individuality and essential ground of
the masculine and feminine of samsara
and Nirvana is the dawn that humanity's
dark night is driving toward this is the
dawn that if successfully navigated will
unite humankind and elevate us into a
form that has never before walked this
earth humanity healed of the scars of
history it's ancient partitions
reabsorbed a people with new capacities
born in the chaos of near extinction
only when we have made this pivot when
our long labor has birthed this future
child only then will we fully understand
what we have accomplished and when this
moment finally comes I deeply believe
that like all mothers before us we will
count our pain as a small price this
birth is our gift to the Creator thank
you for writing this thank you so much
for such a wonderful conversation we so
appreciate it thank you very much it's
been an honor and a privilege to spend
this time with you thank you can I just
read a poem I may have read it before my
motion as loves beauty is moving
standing naked LeAnn blushing in
photonics brightly rushing as loves
artistries unbrushed
time in silent rhythms crushing sped
slowly long and
to bring to rip tidal lushness out as
and of coupling with influx that last
day mm-hmm it's beautiful thank you
Chris could you tell us the names of
your books and maybe just a brief
synopsis about them the books are the
first one is called life cycles
reincarnation in the web of life it's
basically a book on reincarnation
it looks at reincarnation through the
issue of the empirical evidence
it looks at it for it's a psychological
and spiritual phenomenon and then it
once it documents the empirical evidence
for reincarnation and then asks the
questions so what what's the difference
if we see ourselves as reincarnating
beings versus one time through beings so
it's just one of the early attempts to
explore this the universe as a pulsing
throbbing reincarnating universe the
second one is dark night early dawn
which is a book in the philosophical
study of non-ordinary states of
consciousness specifically psychedelic
states of consciousness but integrating
psychedelic studies with near-death
episode research and out-of-body
research trying asking the question is
the question as it shows itself in
near-death episode research in
out-of-body research particularly Robert
Monroe's work at the Monroe Institute
and psychedelic research are those
pictures coherent or are they
fragmenting and so exploring that in
exploring the the ways in which our the
collective psyche shows up in the work
of individuals and the way the
individuals work influences and
contributes to our collective evolution
that integrated part and the third book
is called the living classroom and all
of these are mamaan Amazon or other book
sites the living classroom tells the
story
it's about fields of consciousness
collective consciousness the subtler
background textures of consciousness as
they surface in the classroom because
what I found over time was why like I
kept my personal life my personal
spiritual practice out of the classroom
because it's not appropriate to bring it
into the classroom that was my weekend
work what I found was that the work I
was doing in these very deep states of
consciousness outside of the classroom
began to impact my students in the
classroom and I began to understand and
and had to think about and theorize
about the collective the the nature of
collective consciousness not at the
species level but actually at a very
intimate level of the students that I
was working with weekend week out year
after year so it's about teaching and
collective consciousness so those are
the three and now I'm going back to the
topic of psychedelic work and trying to
give some type of philosophical
description or exploration of that
20-year psychedelic Odyssey that I went
on between 1979 and 1999
you